New window and dialog API (#744)
JetBrains/kotlin-multiplatform-dev-docs: topics/compose/compose-desktop-top-level-windows-management.md

<include from="compose-desktop-scrollbars.md" element-id="desktop-snippets-intro"/>

## New window and dialog API
<primary-label ref="Experimental"/>

[//]: # (TODO update version for stable release)

Starting with Compose Multiplatform 1.12.0-beta02, a redesigned `WindowState` and `DialogState` API is available 
in the `androidx.compose.ui.window.v2` sub-package.
It coexists with the existing API described in the rest of this page, so you can migrate individual windows at your own pace. 
The snippets in this section illustrate individual API features.

### Requesting and observing state

The new API distinguishes between requesting a change to the window and observing its actual state.

To request a change of the window state, you can:

> * pass an initial provider to `rememberWindowState()`:

Reviewer: The initial provider doesn't "request a change", so maybe worth reformulating it.

        WindowBoundsProvider(
            positionProvider = 
                WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToScreen(Alignment.TopStart),
            sizeProvider = 
                WindowSizeProvider.Fixed(DpSize(1024.dp, 768.dp))
        )
    )
    ```

To observe the actual screen and bounds of a window (which may differ from what was requested,
and may change over time), read `WindowState.screenId` and `WindowState.bounds`:

```kotlin
Text("Current screen: ${windowState.screenId}")
Text("Current bounds: ${windowState.bounds}")
```

The same request-and-observe model is available for dialogs through `DialogState` and `rememberDialogState()`.

### Choosing a screen

You can request the screen on which a window should appear either by passing an `initialScreenProvider`
to `rememberWindowState()` or by calling `WindowState.requestScreen` later.
The screen the window is actually placed on is observable via `WindowState.screenId`.

For example, the window will try to appear on a screen whose available width is at least `1024.dp`:

```kotlin
windowState.requestScreen { 
    screens.firstOrNull { it.availableBounds.width >= 1024.dp } 
        ?: defaultScreen
}
```

### Positioning

> To change where and how the window is placed, either pass an `initialBoundsProvider`

Reviewer: What is meant by "how"? "Where" is also ambiguous.

I'd rephrase it in terms of "geometry", "position", "size".

to `rememberWindowState()` or call `WindowState.requestBounds` later.
The actual bounds of the window are observable via `WindowState.bounds`.

The new API uses `WindowPositionProvider` to get information about the screen and parent window geometry.
Along with the built-in `Default` and `Absolute` variants, two alignment-based providers cover most cases:

* `AlignedToScreen` aligns the new window on the screen with an extra offset parameter.
* `AlignedToParentWindow` aligns the new window relative to the parent window, particularly useful for dialogs.
    ```kotlin
    WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToParentWindow(
        anchor = Alignment.TopEnd,

>         alignment = Alignment.BottomEnd

Reviewer: The most common case is centering. Maybe it's better to use it here.

    )
    ```
  
### Sizing

Sizing is also part of the window bounds, so it is configured through the same
`initialBoundsProvider`/`WindowState.requestBounds` mechanism.

The new API uses `WindowSizeProvider` to get information about the screen and parent window sizes, as well as
query the content of the window for its intrinsic sizes.

Common built-in options include `Fixed()` for a specific window size and `Default` for the standard `800×600dp` size.

For custom sizing, a `WindowSizeProvider` lambda has access to screen metrics and,
for dialogs, parent window metrics:

```kotlin
WindowSizeProvider {
    val height = parentWindowMetrics!!.bounds.height
    DpSize(300.dp, height)
}
```

You can size the window to the content's preferred size while still allowing content
using modifiers such as `fillMaxSize()` to fill the window when it is larger:

```kotlin
WindowSizeProvider {
    val screenHeightPx = 
        windowMetrics.screen.availableBounds.height.roundToPx()
    val width = windowContent.maxIntrinsicWidth(screenHeightPx)
    val height = windowContent.maxIntrinsicHeight(width)
    contentToWindowSize(
        DpSize(width.toDp(), height.toDp())
    )

> }

Reviewer: The API changed from the initial PR.
There's no longer `windowContent`. It's now
```
    /**
     * Measures the window content in the given constraints and returns the resulting size.
     *
     * [maxWidth] and [maxHeight] can be [Dp.Infinity] to indicate no (or infinite) constraint.
     */
    fun measureWindowContent(
        minWidth: Dp = 0.dp,
        maxWidth: Dp = Dp.Infinity,
        minHeight: Dp = 0.dp,
        maxHeight: Dp = Dp.Infinity,
    ): DpSize
```

Take a look at https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform-core/blob/jb-main/compose/ui/ui/src/desktopMain/kotlin/androidx/compose/ui/window/v2/WindowGeometryProviders.desktop.kt

preferred size while still letting the content expand (via modifiers like `fillMaxSize()`) when the window is larger. 
See [Sizing](#sizing) for details.

### Specifying and observing state

The new API explicitly separates specifying the desired state from observing the actual state.

To specify the initial state of a window, pass providers to `rememberWindowState()`:

```kotlin
val windowState = rememberWindowState(
    initialScreenProvider = { defaultScreen },
    initialBoundsProvider = WindowBoundsProvider(
        positionProvider = 
            WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToScreen(Alignment.Center),
        sizeProvider = 
            WindowSizeProvider.Fixed(DpSize(800.dp, 600.dp))
    )
)
```

To request a state change after the window has been created, call the corresponding method on `WindowState`:

```kotlin
windowState.requestScreen { defaultScreen }
windowState.requestBounds(
    WindowBoundsProvider(
        positionProvider = 
            WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToScreen(Alignment.TopStart),
        sizeProvider = 
            WindowSizeProvider.Fixed(DpSize(1024.dp, 768.dp))
    )
)

> ```

Reviewer: The use-case for setting the size/location via a provider after the window has been shown is rather rare.
It's much more common to specify the size/location directly (via `DpSize`, `DpOffset` etc.).
On the other hand we do want to showcase the new capabilities. So maybe showcase both here.

<include from="compose-desktop-scrollbars.md" element-id="desktop-snippets-intro"/>

> ## New window and dialog API

Reviewer 2: I'm wary of the word "new" in the title, especially since it's the first section on the page and people not familiar with CMP won't understand the context fully until they read the whole page.

I'd try to find a more solid differentiator. As far as I understand the main point is to separate observing the state from setting it? Or is it more about the custom sizing and positioning?

Reviewer 2: Also, should this section be that high on the page? Shouldn't we learn that `Window()` exists first? :)

This would make it easier to mention the new API in the old basic sections, consistently linking forward where it's appropriate to nudge people towards the experimental stuff.

> <primary-label ref="Experimental"/>

Reviewer 2: The examples in this section don't mention the `ExperimentalComposeUiApi` opt-in at all. Most of them are small enough to make adding it awkward, but there's got to be at least a warning in the beginning, maybe even in the beginning of each subsection.

[//]: # (TODO update version for stable release)

> Starting with Compose Multiplatform 1.12.0-beta02, a redesigned `WindowState` and `DialogState` API is available 

Reviewer 2: They are separate entities, right?
```suggestion
Starting with Compose Multiplatform 1.12.0-beta02, redesigned `WindowState` and `DialogState` APIs are available 
```

> in the `androidx.compose.ui.window.v2` subpackage.

Reviewer 2: The KDoc says that the new classes may be moved to `androidx.compose.ui.window` before going stable, should we mention that? That seems like a potentially hard deadline for migrating at your own pace.

The new API separates requesting a window state from observing the state actually applied by the window manager.

> It coexists with the existing API described in the rest of this page, so you can migrate individual windows at your own pace. 

Reviewer 2: Existing coexists.
```suggestion
It is available along with the older API described in the rest of this page, so you can migrate individual windows at your own pace. 
```

Reviewer 2: Also if we refer to the other API we should give a link or name to identify it properly, "rest of this page" is ambiguous.

> The examples in this section demonstrate the main API features.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this sentence? *insert Vine "I sure hope it does"*

The redesigned API also unlocks scenarios that weren't possible before, such as sizing a window to its content's 
preferred size while still letting the content expand (via modifiers like `fillMaxSize()`) when the window is larger. 
See [Sizing](#sizing) for details.

> ### Specifying and observing state

Reviewer 2: The heading style is different from the rest, which is imperative. So it should probably be "Specify and observe" etc.

> The new API explicitly separates specifying the desired state from observing the actual state.

Reviewer 2: Here instead of "new API" maybe call it "window.v2 API"? No need to go into an explanation again, but less ambiguity.

To specify the initial state of a window, pass providers to `rememberWindowState()`:

```kotlin
val windowState = rememberWindowState(
    initialScreenProvider = { defaultScreen },
    initialBoundsProvider = WindowBoundsProvider(
        positionProvider = 
            WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToScreen(Alignment.Center),
        sizeProvider = 

>             WindowSizeProvider.Fixed(DpSize(800.dp, 600.dp))

Reviewer 2: I think this is the default value, so adding it won't change much? Should we use something obviously different, like 500 × 1000?

    )
)
```

To request a state change after the window has been created, call the corresponding method on `WindowState`.
You can specify the exact size and position directly:

```kotlin
windowState.requestScreen { defaultScreen }
windowState.requestSize(DpSize(1024.dp, 768.dp))
windowState.requestPosition(DpOffset(100.dp, 100.dp))
```

For relative positioning or to calculate dimensions dynamically, use providers:

```kotlin
windowState.requestBounds(
    WindowBoundsProvider(
        positionProvider = 
            WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToScreen(Alignment.TopStart),
        sizeProvider = 
            WindowSizeProvider.Fixed(DpSize(1024.dp, 768.dp))
    )
)
```

Applying a request is asynchronous. The windowing system may adjust the requested state, and the actual state may change later,
for example, when you move or resize the window.
Observe the actual state of a window through `WindowState.screenId` and `WindowState.bounds`:

```kotlin
Text("Current screen: ${windowState.screenId}")

> Text("Current bounds: ${windowState.bounds}")

Reviewer 2: Maybe that's too finicky, but especially for asynchronous stuff I would highlight that the state shouldn't be read before the window exists: there's `WindowState.isInitialized` to check for that. Whether to wrap the actual sample in this or just add a comment is a judgment call.

```

The same explicitly asynchronous model is available for dialogs through `DialogState` and `rememberDialogState()`.

### Choosing a screen

You can request the screen on which a window should appear either by passing an `initialScreenProvider`

> to `rememberWindowState()` or by calling `WindowState.requestScreen` later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to `rememberWindowState()` or by calling `WindowState.requestScreen()` later.
```

The screen the window is actually placed on is observable via `WindowState.screenId`.

> For example, the window requests placement on a screen whose available width is at least `1024.dp`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, you can request a window to be placed on a screen whose available width is at least `1024.dp`,
```

falling back to the default screen otherwise:

```kotlin
windowState.requestScreen { 
    screens.firstOrNull { it.availableBounds.width >= 1024.dp } 
        ?: defaultScreen
}
```

### Positioning

To change the window position, either pass an `initialBoundsProvider`

> to `rememberWindowState()` or call `WindowState.requestBounds` later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to `rememberWindowState()` or call `WindowState.requestBounds()` later.
```

The actual bounds of the window are observable via `WindowState.bounds`.

The new API uses `WindowPositionProvider` to get information about the screen and parent window geometry.

> Along with the built-in `Default` and `Absolute` variants, two alignment-based providers cover most cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Along with the built-in `Default` and `Absolute()` variants, two alignment-based providers cover most cases:
```

> * `AlignedToScreen` aligns the new window on the screen with an extra offset parameter.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what that means; "aligns the borders of the window with the edges of the screen"? Top and left borders? Maybe have an example like for ParentWindow below?

> * `AlignedToScreen` aligns the new window on the screen with an extra offset parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `AlignedToScreen()` aligns the new window on the screen with an extra offset parameter.
```

> * `AlignedToParentWindow` aligns the new window relative to the parent window, particularly useful for dialogs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `AlignedToParentWindow()` aligns the new window relative to the parent window, particularly useful for dialogs.
```

>     ```kotlin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

    ```kotlin
```

    WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToParentWindow(
        anchor = Alignment.TopEnd,
        alignment = Alignment.Center

>     )

Reviewer 2: Can we describe the effect of this? I understand the center part, but what does `TopEnd` do here is hard to visualize.

    ```

>     Here, `anchor` specifies the point in the parent bounds relative to which `alignment` is applied.

Reviewer 2: The list is a bit disjointed: `Default`, `Absolute()`, `AlignedToScreen`, and `AlignedToParentWindow` are all part of the same list, but only two of them are visible and explained, and there are also `CenteredInParentWindow` and `CenteredOnScreen` options which seem fairly simple and useful to leave them out.

### Sizing

Sizing is also part of the window bounds, so it is configured through the same
`initialBoundsProvider`/`WindowState.requestBounds` mechanism.

The new API uses `WindowSizeProvider` to get information about the screen and parent window sizes, as well as
query the content of the window for its intrinsic sizes.

> Common built-in options include `Fixed()` for a specific window size and `Default` for the standard `800×600 dp` size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Common built-in options include `Fixed()` for a specific window size and `Default` for the standard 800×600 pixel size.
```

For custom sizing, a `WindowSizeProvider` lambda has access to screen metrics and,
for dialogs, parent window metrics:

```kotlin
WindowSizeProvider {
    val height = parentWindowMetrics!!.bounds.height
    DpSize(300.dp, height)
}
```

> A common scenario that wasn't possible with the old API is sizing a window to its content's preferred size, 

Reviewer 2: Again, reference to the "old API" can be ambiguous.

while still letting the content fill the window when the user makes it larger.

> Use the built-in `WindowSizeProvider.Unconstrained`, which measures the content with unconstrained (infinite) constraints 

Reviewer 2: I'm struggling with the phrase: measures with unconstrained constraints? I'd simplify this a little, like ", which determines optimal size for the content, adds the window insets and only caps the result at the available size of the screen."

"Optimal" because content preferring something is a bit anthropomorphizing.

to determine its preferred size, adds the window insets, and caps the result at the screen's available size. 
Since sizing is decoupled from layout, content that uses `fillMaxSize()` still expands to fill the window if the user resizes it larger.

```kotlin
WindowBoundsProvider(
    sizeProvider = WindowSizeProvider.Unconstrained,

>     positionProvider = WindowPositionProvider.CenteredOnScreen,

Reviewer 2: If this does the same thing as `WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToScreen(Alignment.Center)` above, I'd use one approach consistently; otherwise it may read as if we imply that they are different without explanation.

)
```

> The `Window()` and `DialogWindow()` composables accept `minSize` and `maxSize` parameters. 

Reviewer 2: If this is about the new API, I'd mention that: it's hard to keep in mind that there are new composables with the same names. And to support that, might be nice to add an explicit `import androidx.compose.ui.window.v2.DialogWindow` to the example below to highlight the correct class.

```
{initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true" collapsed-title="@Composable private fun FileDialog( parent: Frame? = null, "}

## Window and dialog API v2
<primary-label ref="Experimental"/>

[//]: # (TODO update version for stable release)

Starting with Compose Multiplatform 1.12.0-beta02, the redesigned `WindowState` and `DialogState` classes are available
in the `androidx.compose.ui.window.v2` subpackage.

> The v2 API separates requesting a window state from observing the state actually applied by the window manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The v2 window APIs separate requesting a window state from observing the state actually applied by the window manager.
```

To simply refer to a "v2 API" I'd introduce this shorthand first.

* `Absolute()` places the window at specified `x` and `y` coordinates.
* `AlignedToScreen()` aligns the window relative to the screen and includes an optional offset parameter.
    ```kotlin
    WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToScreen(
        alignment = Alignment.Center,
        offset = DpOffset(x = 16.dp, y = 16.dp)
    )
    ```
* `AlignedToParentWindow()` anchors the window to the parent window, typically useful for dialogs.
    ```kotlin
    WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToParentWindow(
        // Anchors to the top-start point of the parent window
        anchor = Alignment.TopStart,
        // Applies alignment relative to the anchor point
        alignment = Alignment.Center
    )
    ```

### Specify size

Sizing is also part of the window bounds, so it is configured through the same
`initialBoundsProvider`/`WindowState.requestBounds()` mechanism.

The v2 API uses `WindowSizeProvider` to get information about the screen and parent window sizes, as well as
to query the content of the window for its intrinsic sizes.

Common built-in options include `Fixed()` for a specific window size and `Default` for the standard 800×600 dp size.

> For custom sizing, a `WindowSizeProvider` lambda has access to screen metrics and,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For custom sizing, a `WindowSizeProvider()` lambda has access to screen metrics and,
```

We discussed it in relation to Ktor, but as it is the Kotlin guidelines only omit parenthesis for scope functions.

```
{initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true" collapsed-title="@Composable private fun FileDialog( parent: Frame? = null, "}

> ## Window and dialog API v2

Reviewer 2: New placement is better, but maybe not all the way below Swing interop? Not sure if I have a firm rule of thumb here, but Swing feels like a more niche subject.

Author: Added a short promo to the intro

<primary-label ref="Experimental"/>

[//]: # (TODO update version for stable release)

Starting with Compose Multiplatform 1.12.0-beta02, the redesigned `WindowState` and `DialogState` classes are available
in the `androidx.compose.ui.window.v2` subpackage.

> The v2 API separates requesting a window state from observing the state actually applied by the window manager.

Reviewer 2: It feels like this line and the next paragraph talk about the same thing (features) and should be merged, while the note on migration is a separate concern.

The v2 API is available along with the existing API described in the rest of this page, 
so you can migrate individual windows at your own pace.

The v2 API also unlocks scenarios that weren't possible before, such as sizing a window to its content's
preferred size while still letting the content expand (via modifiers like `fillMaxSize()`) when the window is larger.
See [Specify size](#specify-size) for details.

### Specify and observe state

The v2 API explicitly separates specifying the desired state from observing the actual state.

To specify the initial state of a window, pass providers to `rememberWindowState()`:

```kotlin
val windowState = rememberWindowState(

>     initialScreenProvider = { defaultScreen },

Reviewer 2: I think this is still doing nothing, the default is `defaultScreen` already. Is it worth it to show the call anyway? I'd comment on this at least because otherwise it looks odd.

to `rememberWindowState()` or by calling `WindowState.requestScreen()` later.
The screen the window is actually placed on is observable via `WindowState.screenId`.

For example, you can request a window to be placed on a screen whose available width is at least `1024.dp`,
falling back to the default screen:

```kotlin
windowState.requestScreen {
    screens.firstOrNull { it.availableBounds.width >= 1024.dp }
        ?: defaultScreen
}
```

### Specify position

To change the window position, either pass an `initialBoundsProvider`
to `rememberWindowState()` or call `WindowState.requestBounds()` later.
The actual bounds of the window are observable via `WindowState.bounds`.

The v2 API uses `WindowPositionProvider` to get information about the screen and parent window geometry.

For standard placements, you can use the built-in properties:

* `Default` applies the operating system's standard cascading behavior.
* `Current` maintains the current position of the window.
* `CenteredOnScreen` centers the window within the screen.
* `CenteredInParentWindow` centers the window within its parent window.

For more control, use position provider functions:

> * `Absolute()` places the window at specified `x` and `y` coordinates.

Reviewer 2: "Places the window" probably means "places the top right corner of the window"? I'd clarify that, no harm in being precise here.

Author: "top right" does not respect layout direction, it would be wrong for RTL locales

* `AlignedToScreen()` aligns the window relative to the screen and includes an optional offset parameter.
    ```kotlin
    WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToScreen(
        alignment = Alignment.Center,
        offset = DpOffset(x = 16.dp, y = 16.dp)
    )
    ```
* `AlignedToParentWindow()` anchors the window to the parent window, typically useful for dialogs.
    ```kotlin
    WindowPositionProvider.AlignedToParentWindow(

>         // Anchors to the top-start point of the parent window

Reviewer 2: Maybe I'm not in the know, but "top-start point" doesn't tell me a lot :) could we explain it in more layman's terms?

Author: Renamed it to the starting corner

        anchor = Alignment.TopStart,
        // Applies alignment relative to the anchor point
        alignment = Alignment.Center
    )
    ```

### Specify size

Sizing is also part of the window bounds, so it is configured through the same
`initialBoundsProvider`/`WindowState.requestBounds()` mechanism.

The v2 API uses `WindowSizeProvider` to get information about the screen and parent window sizes, as well as
to query the content of the window for its intrinsic sizes.

Common built-in options include `Fixed()` for a specific window size and `Default` for the standard 800×600 dp size.

For custom sizing, a `WindowSizeProvider` lambda has access to screen metrics and,
for dialogs, parent window metrics:

```kotlin
WindowSizeProvider {
    val height = parentWindowMetrics!!.bounds.height
    DpSize(300.dp, height)
}
```

A common scenario that wasn't possible without the v2 API is sizing a window to its content's preferred size,

> while still letting the content fill the window when the user makes it larger.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence can be made a bit lighter: "One common scenario is only made possible with the v2 API: With it, you can size a window <...> and still let the content fill <...>"

More verbs to the verbs god!

`WindowSizeProvider.Unconstrained` calculates the content's size, adds the window insets,
and caps the result at the available screen size.
Since sizing is decoupled from layout, content that uses `fillMaxSize()` still expands to fill the window if the user resizes it.

```kotlin
WindowBoundsProvider(
    positionProvider = WindowPositionProvider.CenteredOnScreen,
    sizeProvider = WindowSizeProvider.Unconstrained
)
```

The v2 versions of the `Window()` and `DialogWindow()` composables accept `minSize` and `maxSize` parameters.
Where the underlying window manager supports it, the user will not be able to resize the window past these bounds:

```kotlin

> DialogWindow(

Reviewer 2: I Bernie Sanders again to mention the `ExperimentalComposeUiApi` opt-in: it's there in the example in What's new, but not anywhere on this page. Stuff just won't compile.

Author: Added full example with all imports and the ExperimentalComposeUiApi opt-in
